DOC: Update arraycreation (#17887)
numpy/numpy: doc/source/user/basics.creation.rst

Introduction
============

There are 6 general mechanisms for creating arrays:

1) Conversion from other Python structures (i.e. lists and tuples)
2) Intrinsic NumPy array creation objects (e.g. arange, ones, zeros,
   etc.)
3) Replicating, joining, or mutating existing arrays
4) Reading arrays from disk, either from standard or custom formats
5) Creating arrays from raw bytes through the use of strings or buffers
6) Use of special library functions (e.g., random)

You can use these methods to create ND arrays or :doc:`structured_arrays`.

> This document will cover general methods for ND array creation. 

Author: Yes, I should change ND array to ndarray for docs consistency. Thanks for pointing that out. I like ND array, but it can't be the only occurrence in the docs.

                 [ [5, 6], [7, 8]]
                 ])

When you use :func:`numpy.array` to define a new array, consider the
:doc:`dtype <basics.types>` of the elements in the array. You should
specify the ``dtype`` for elements in the array. This feature gives you
more control over the underlying data structures and how the elements
are handled in C/C++ functions. If you are not careful with ``dtype``
assignments, you can get unwanted overflow, as such 

::

 >>> a = array([127,128,129], dtype = int8)
 >>> print(a)
 [ 127 -128 -127 ]

An 8-bit signed integer represents integers from -128 to 127.
Assigning the ``int8`` array to integers outside of this range results
in overflow. This feature can often be misunderstood. If you
perform calculations with mismatching ``dtypes``, you can get unwanted
result,  for example: ::

    >>> a = array([2, 3, 4], dtype = uint32)
    >>> b = array([5, 6, 7], dtype = uint32)
    >>> c_unsigned32 = a - b
    >>> print('unsigned c:', c_unsigned32, c_unsigned32.dtype)
    unsigned c: [4294967293 4294967293 4294967293] uint32
    >>> c_signed32 = a - b.astype(int32)
    >>> print('signed c:', c_signed32, c_signed32.dtype)

>     signed c: [-3 -3 -3] int64

Author: updated the functions to use `np.<...>` in each NumPy-specific function

as ``int64``. 

The default NumPy behavior is to create arrays in either 64-bit signed
integers or double precision floating point numbers, ``int64`` and
``float``, respectively. If you expect your arrays to be a certain type,
then you need to specify the ``dtype`` while you create the array. 

2) Intrinsic NumPy array creation objects
=========================================
..
  40 functions seems like a small number, but the routies.array-creation
  has ~47. I'm sure there are more. 

NumPy has over 40 built-in functions for creating arrays as laid
out in the :ref:`Array creation routines <routines.array-creation>`.
There are three categories of NumPy array creation objects:
1) 1D arrays
2) 2D arrays
3) ND arrays

1 - 1D array creation objects
-----------------------------

The 1D array creation objects e.g. :func:`numpy.linspace` and
:func:`numpy.arange` generally  need at least two inputs ``start`` and
``stop``. Where ``start`` is the first value in the array and ``stop``
specifies the value of the last element in the array. 

:func:`numpy.arange` creates arrays with regularly incrementing values.
Check the docstring for complete information and examples. A few

> examples are shown: ::

Author: I'm fine dropping the colon in these "for example:" endings. 

I had left a ":" to end the explanation and move to code, but it's probably not necessary.

> examples are shown: ::

Reviewer: `foo::` both starts a code block _and_ outputs a single colon

 >>> arange(10)
 array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])
 >>> arange(2, 10, dtype=float)
 array([ 2., 3., 4., 5., 6., 7., 8., 9.])
 >>> arange(2, 3, 0.1)
 array([ 2. , 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9])

> Note: there are some subtleties regarding ``dtype``. In the second

Reviewer 2: Maybe here we could use a `.. note::` directive? Otherwise, the text could flow better without the colon, I think.

example, the ``dtype`` is defined. In the third example, the array is

> ``dtype = float`` to accomodate the step size of ``0.1``. 

Reviewer 2: PEP8

```suggestion
``dtype=float`` to accomodate the step size of ``0.1``. 
```

:func:`numpy.linspace` will create arrays with a specified number of elements, and
spaced equally between the specified beginning and end values. For
example: ::

 >>> linspace(1., 4., 6)
 array([ 1. ,  1.6,  2.2,  2.8,  3.4,  4. ])

The advantage of this creation object is that you guarantee the
number of elements and the starting and end point. The previous

> ``arange(start, stop, step)`` will not include the value ``stop``.

Reviewer 2: Any reason to change from function to object in the text above?

I think it might be helpful to include a note here about [expected `arange` behaviour](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/17342) with non-integer steps.

Author: > Any reason to change from function to object in the text above?

I missed that mention of "function". I originally wrote all my notes as referring to "functions" instead of the preexisting vocabulary "objects".

I'll change ~~function~~ -> "object"

> I think it might be helpful to include a note here about [expected `arange` behaviour](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/17342) with non-integer steps.

I hadn't run into this problem before, thanks for suggesting the note! This is a great place to discuss this behavior. 

Why does `arange` sometimes include the `stop` value? Is it a roundoff issue?

Reviewer 3: > Any reason to change from function to object in the text above?

I think the question was the opposite: use `function` not `object`. Although everything in python is an object, it is more precise to refer to the routines as `functions`.

> Why does arange sometimes include the stop value? Is it a roundoff issue?

Yes, and it is a common source of new user confusion.

2 - 2D array creation objects
-----------------------------

The 2D array creation objects e.g. :func:`numpy.eye`, :func:`numpy.diag`, and :func:`numpy.vander`
define properties of special matrices represented as 2D arrays. 

> ``eye(n,m)`` defines a 2D identity matrix. The elements where i=j are 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``np.eye(n, m)`` defines a 2D identity matrix. The elements where i=j are 1
```

and the rest are 0, as such::

 >>> eye(3)
 array([[1., 0., 0.],
        [0., 1., 0.],
        [0., 0., 1.]])

>  >>> eye(3,5)

Reviewer 2: PEP8

```suggestion
 >>> eye(3, 5)
```

 array([[1., 0., 0., 0., 0.],
        [0., 1., 0., 0., 0.],
        [0., 0., 1., 0., 0.]])

:func:`numpy.diag` can define either a square 2D array with given values along
the diagonal _or_ if given a 2D array returns a 1D array that is

> only the diagonal elements. The two array creations can be helpful while
> doing linear algebra as such::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
only the diagonal elements. The two array creation functions can be helpful while
doing linear algebra, as such::
```

>  >>> diag([1,2,3])

Reviewer 2: PEP8

```suggestion
 >>> diag([1, 2, 3])
```

 array([[1, 0, 0],
       [0, 2, 0],
       [0, 0, 3]])

>  >>> diag([1,2,3],1)

Reviewer 2: PEP8

```suggestion
 >>> diag([1, 2, 3], 1)
```

 array([[0, 1, 0, 0],
        [0, 0, 2, 0],
        [0, 0, 0, 3],
        [0, 0, 0, 0]])
 >>> a = np.array([[1, 2], [3, 4]])
 >>> diag(a)
 array([1, 4])

> ``vander(x,n)`` defines a Vandermonde matrix as a 2D NumPy array. Each column

Reviewer 2: PEP8

```suggestion
``vander(x, n)`` defines a Vandermonde matrix as a 2D NumPy array. Each column
```

         [0., 0.],
         [0., 0.]],

        [[0., 0.],
         [0., 0.],
         [0., 0.]]])

:func:`numpy.ones` will create an array filled with 1 values. It is identical to
``zeros`` in all other respects as such, ::

 >>> np.ones((2, 3))
 array([[ 1., 1., 1.], 
        [ 1., 1., 1.]])
 >>> np.ones((2, 3, 2))
 array([[[1., 1.],
         [1., 1.],
         [1., 1.]],

        [[1., 1.],
         [1., 1.],
         [1., 1.]]])

:func:`numpy.indices` will create a set of arrays (stacked as a one-higher
dimensioned array), one per dimension with each representing variation in that
dimension.  An example illustrates much better than a verbal description: ::

 >>> np.indices((3,3))
 array([[[0, 0, 0], [1, 1, 1], [2, 2, 2]], [[0, 1, 2], [0, 1, 2], [0, 1, 2]]])

This is particularly useful for evaluating functions of multiple dimensions on
a regular grid.

3) Replicating, joining, or mutating existing arrays
====================================================

Once you have created arrays, you can replicate, join, or mutate those
existing arrays to create new arrays. When you assign an array or its
elements to a new variable, you have to explicitly :func:`numpy.copy` the array,

> otherwise the variable is a view into the original array. Consider the

Reviewer 2: Might be worth linking to [copies and views](https://numpy.org/devdocs/user/quickstart.html#copies-and-views)

Author: Good idea, thanks

following example, ::

 >>> a = array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6])
 >>> b = a[:2]
 >>> b += 1
 >>> print('a = ', a, 'b = ', b)
 a =  [2 3 3 4 5 6] b =  [2 3]

In this example, you did not create a new array. You created a variable,
``b`` that viewed the first 2 elements of ``a``. When you added 1 to ``b`` you
would get the same result by adding 1 to ``a[:2]``. If you want to create a
_new_ array, use the :func:`numpy.copy` array creation routine as such, ::

 >>> a = array([1, 2, 3, 4])
 >>> b = a[:2].copy()
 >>> b += 1
 >>> print('a = ', a, 'b = ', b)
 a =  [1 2 3 4 5 6] b =  [2 3]

There are a number of routines to join existing arrays e.g. :func:`numpy.vstack`,
:func:`numpy.hstack`, and :func:`numpy.block`. Here is an example of joining four 2-by-2
arrays into a 4-by-4 array using ``block`` ::

 >>> A = ones((2, 2))
 >>> B = eye((2, 2))
 >>> C = zeros((2, 2))
 >>> D = diag((-3, -4))
 >>> block([[A, B], 
            [C, D]])
 array([[ 1.,  1.,  1.,  0. ],
        [ 1.,  1.,  0.,  1. ],
        [ 0.,  0., -3.,  0. ],
        [ 0.,  0.,  0., -4. ]])

> Other routines use similar syntax to join ND arrays, check the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other routines use similar syntax to join ND arrays. Check the
```

routine's documentation for further examples and syntax. 

4) Reading arrays from disk, either from standard or custom formats
===================================================================

This is the most common case of large array creation. The details depend
greatly on the format of data on disk. This section gives
general pointers on how to handle various formats.

Standard Binary Formats
-----------------------

Various fields have standard formats for array data. The following lists the
ones with known Python libraries to read them and return NumPy arrays (there
may be others for which it is possible to read and convert to NumPy arrays so
check the last section as well)
::

 HDF5: h5py
 FITS: Astropy

>  # ?? anything else??

Reviewer 2: There could be many including Zarr, netCDF and others, but I think this can be done in a follow-up.

Author: removed the `# anything else` and I'll leave for another time

Examples of formats that cannot be read directly but for which it is not hard to
convert are those formats supported by libraries like PIL (able to read and
write many image formats such as jpg, png, etc).

Common ASCII Formats
--------------------

Delimited files such as comma separated value (csv) and tab separated
value (tsv) files are used for programs like Excel and LabView. Python
functions can read and parse these files line-by-line. NumPy has two
standard routines for importing a file with delimited data :func:`numpy.loadtxt`
and :func:`numpy.genfromtxt`. These functions have more involved use cases in
:doc:`how-to-io`. A simple example given a ``simple.csv``::

 $ cat simple.csv
 x, y
 0, 0
 1, 1
 2, 4
 3, 9

Importing ``simple.csv`` is accomplished using :func:`loadtxt`::

 >>> loadtxt('simple.csv', delimiter = ',', skiprows = 1) # doctest: +SKIP
 array([[0., 0.],
        [1., 1.],
        [2., 4.],
        [3., 9.]])

> More generic ascii files can be read using `SciPy
> io<https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/io.html>`_ and `Pandas
> <https://pandas.pydata.org/>`_.
> ..
>   intersphinx links for io and Pandas?

Reviewer 2: I think Pandas can be as it is. This should work:
```suggestion
More generic ASCII files can be read using `scipy.io` and `Pandas
<https://pandas.pydata.org/>`_.
```

5) Creating arrays from raw bytes through the use of strings or buffers
=======================================================================

There are a variety of approaches one can use. If the file has a relatively
simple format then one can write a simple I/O library and use the NumPy

> fromfile() function and .tofile() method to read and write NumPy arrays

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`fromfile()` function and `.tofile()` method to read and write NumPy arrays
```

directly (mind your byteorder though!) If a good C or C++ library exists that
read the data, one can wrap that library with a variety of techniques though
that certainly is much more work and requires significantly more advanced
knowledge to interface with C or C++.
..
  This section I can update, but its outside my experience

6) Use of special library functions (e.g., SciPy, Pandas, and OpenCV)
=====================================================================

NumPy is a fundamental library in the Python Scientific Computing stack. 
Many Python libraries, including SciPy, Pandas, and OpenCV, can create,
operate on, and work with NumPy arrays. 
..

>   These libraries could benefit from a few examples, but it may be

Reviewer 2: Agreed - this can be done later.

1) Conversion from other Python structures (i.e. lists and tuples)
2) Intrinsic NumPy array creation functions (e.g. arange, ones, zeros,
   etc.)
3) Replicating, joining, or mutating existing arrays
4) Reading arrays from disk, either from standard or custom formats
5) Creating arrays from raw bytes through the use of strings or buffers
6) Use of special library functions (e.g., random)

You can use these methods to create  ndarrays or :ref:`structured_arrays`.
This document will cover general methods for ndarray creation. 

1) Converting Python sequences to NumPy Arrays
===============================================

NumPy arrays can be defined using Python sequences such as lists and
tuples. Lists and tuples are defined using ``[...]`` and ``(...)``,
respectively. Lists and tuples can define ndarray creation::
* a list of numbers will create a 1D array, 
* a list of lists will create a 2D array, 
* further nested lists will create higher-dimensional arrays. In general,
  any array object is called an **ndarray** in NumPy.

::

 >>> a1D = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4])
 >>> a2D = np.array([[1, 2], [3, 4]])
 >>> a3D = np.array([[[1, 2], [3, 4]],

>                      [[5, 6], [7, 8]]])

Reviewer 3: Did you mean to indent this block?

Author: > Did you mean to indent this block?

Yes, I was following the convention I found in the `basics.creation.rst` where the code was indented with a space in the examples:

```
::

\s>>> example = 1
```

Should they have a 4-space indent for PEP-8?

Reviewer 3: That would be nicer, I thought the failure to build the docs that pointed to line 34 was because there is no indentation. I missed the single space :(

Author: > That would be nicer, I thought the failure to build the docs that pointed to line 34 was because there is no indentation. I missed the single space :(

I missed it at first too, looking at `absolute_beginners.rst` the code is indented with two space-indents `\s\s`. 

Q: Should there be a Sphinx indentation standard in the docs?

perform calculations with mismatching ``dtypes``, you can get unwanted
results,  for example::

    >>> a = array([2, 3, 4], dtype = np.uint32)
    >>> b = array([5, 6, 7], dtype = np.uint32)
    >>> c_unsigned32 = a - b
    >>> print('unsigned c:', c_unsigned32, c_unsigned32.dtype)
    unsigned c: [4294967293 4294967293 4294967293] uint32
    >>> c_signed32 = a - b.astype(np.int32)
    >>> print('signed c:', c_signed32, c_signed32.dtype)
    signed c: [-3 -3 -3] int64

Notice when you perform operations with two arrays of the same
``dtype``: ``uint32``, the resulting array is the same type. When you
perform operations with different ``dtype``, NumPy will 
assign a new type that satisfies all of the array elements involved in
the computation, here ``uint32`` and ``int32`` can both be represented in
as ``int64``. 

The default NumPy behavior is to create arrays in either 64-bit signed
integers or double precision floating point numbers, ``int64`` and
``float``, respectively. If you expect your arrays to be a certain type,
then you need to specify the ``dtype`` while you create the array. 

2) Intrinsic NumPy array creation functions

> =========================================

Reviewer 3: underline too short

Reviewer 2: There are other places where this is failing, you can see them [in the CircleCI build output](https://app.circleci.com/pipelines/github/numpy/numpy/5898/workflows/55401f06-bc08-4f31-9b71-dc527e2508ec/jobs/17985)

Author: thanks, updating now

Introduction
============

There are 6 general mechanisms for creating arrays:

1) Conversion from other Python structures (i.e. lists and tuples)
2) Intrinsic NumPy array creation objects (e.g. arange, ones, zeros,
   etc.)
3) Replicating, joining, or mutating existing arrays
4) Reading arrays from disk, either from standard or custom formats
5) Creating arrays from raw bytes through the use of strings or buffers
6) Use of special library functions (e.g., random)

You can use these methods to create  ndarrays or :ref:`structured_arrays`.
This document will cover general methods for ndarray creation. 

> 1) Converting Python structures to NumPy Arrays

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1) Converting Python sequences to NumPy Arrays
```

===============================================

> NumPy arrays can be defined using Python structures such as lists and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NumPy arrays can be defined using Python sequences such as lists and
```

tuples. Lists and tuples are defined using ``[...]`` and ``(...)``,

> respectively. Lists and tuples can define ndarray creation:

Reviewer 3: This is not creating a unorderd list. Is another `:` needed?
```suggestion
respectively. Lists and tuples can define ndarray creation::
```

* a list of numbers will create a 1D array, 
* a list of lists will create a 2D array, 

> * further nested lists will create ndarrays

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* further nested lists will create higher-dimensional arrays. In general,
  any array object is called an **ndarray** in NumPy.
```

> respectively. Lists and tuples can define ndarray creation::
> * a list of numbers will create a 1D array, 
> * a list of lists will create a 2D array, 
> * further nested lists will create higher-dimensional arrays. In general, any array object is called an **ndarray** in NumPy.

Reviewer 2: There's a tiny formatting issue here:
```suggestion
respectively. Lists and tuples can define ndarray creation:

* a list of numbers will create a 1D array, 
* a list of lists will create a 2D array, 
* further nested lists will create higher-dimensional arrays. In general, any array object is called an **ndarray** in NumPy.
```

  any array object is called an **ndarray** in NumPy.

::

 >>> a1D = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4])
 >>> a2D = np.array([[1, 2], [3, 4]])

>  >>> a3D = np.array([[[1, 2], [3, 4]],
>                     [[5, 6], [7, 8]]
>                     ])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 >>> a3D = np.array([[[1, 2], [3, 4]],
                     [[5, 6], [7, 8]]])
```

> When you use :func:`numpy.array` to define a new array, consider the
> :doc:`dtype <basics.types>` of the elements in the array. You should
> specify the ``dtype`` for elements in the array. This feature gives you

Reviewer: These two sentences are rather repetitive.
```suggestion
When you use :func:`numpy.array` to define a new array, you should
consider the :doc:`dtype <basics.types>` of the elements in the array,
which can be specified explicitly. This feature gives you
```

more control over the underlying data structures and how the elements
are handled in C/C++ functions. If you are not careful with ``dtype``
assignments, you can get unwanted overflow, as such 

::

 >>> a = np.array([127, 128, 129], dtype=np.int8)

>  >>> print(a)
>  [ 127 -128 -127 ]

Reviewer: It might be better to not encourage `print` here:
```suggestion
 >>> a
 array([ 127, -128, -127], dtype=int8)
```

    unsigned c: [4294967293 4294967293 4294967293] uint32
    >>> c_signed32 = a - b.astype(np.int32)
    >>> print('signed c:', c_signed32, c_signed32.dtype)
    signed c: [-3 -3 -3] int64

Notice when you perform operations with two arrays of the same
``dtype``: ``uint32``, the resulting array is the same type. When you
perform operations with different ``dtype``, NumPy will 
assign a new type that satisfies all of the array elements involved in
the computation, here ``uint32`` and ``int32`` can both be represented in
as ``int64``. 

The default NumPy behavior is to create arrays in either 64-bit signed
integers or double precision floating point numbers, ``int64`` and
``float``, respectively. If you expect your arrays to be a certain type,
then you need to specify the ``dtype`` while you create the array. 

2) Intrinsic NumPy array creation objects
=========================================
..
  40 functions seems like a small number, but the routies.array-creation
  has ~47. I'm sure there are more. 

NumPy has over 40 built-in functions for creating arrays as laid
out in the :ref:`Array creation routines <routines.array-creation>`.

> There are three categories of NumPy array creation objects:
> 1) 1D arrays
> 2) 2D arrays
> 3) ndarrays

Reviewer 3: Not rendered as a list. Also, technically they all are ndarrays...
```suggestion
There are three categories of NumPy array creation objects::
1) 1D arrays (or 1D ndarrays)
2) 2D arrays (or 2D ndarrays)
3) general ndarrays (just called ndarray)
```

> 1 - 1D array creation objects

Reviewer 3: I would drop the use of numbered lists. You are already inside point (2) Intrinsic NumPy array creation objects, so the added numbers are confusing, and the right navbar clearly specifies the layered hierarchy..
```suggestion
1 - 1D array creation functions
```

> There are three categories of NumPy array creation objects::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These functions can be split into roughly three categories, based on the
dimension of the array they create::
```

Author: adding to next commit

-----------------------------

> The 1D array creation objects e.g. :func:`numpy.linspace` and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The 1D array creation functions e.g. :func:`numpy.linspace` and
```

:func:`numpy.arange` generally need at least two inputs, ``start`` and

> ``stop``, where ``start`` is the first value in the array and ``stop``
> specifies the value of the last element in the array. 

Reviewer 3: The description is misleading: stop is not the value of the last element in the array.
```suggestion
``stop``. 
```

 >>> np.arange(2, 3, 0.1)
 array([ 2. , 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9])

Note: best practice for :func:`numpy.arange` is to use integer start, end, and
step values. There are some subtleties regarding ``dtype``. In the second
example, the ``dtype`` is defined. In the third example, the array is
``dtype=float`` to accomodate the step size of ``0.1``. Due to roundoff error,
the ``stop`` value is sometimes included. 

:func:`numpy.linspace` will create arrays with a specified number of elements, and
spaced equally between the specified beginning and end values. For
example: ::

 >>> np.linspace(1., 4., 6)
 array([ 1. ,  1.6,  2.2,  2.8,  3.4,  4. ])

The advantage of this creation function is that you guarantee the
number of elements and the starting and end point. The previous
``arange(start, stop, step)`` will not include the value ``stop``.

2 - 2D array creation functions
-----------------------------

The 2D array creation functions e.g. :func:`numpy.eye`, :func:`numpy.diag`, and :func:`numpy.vander`
define properties of special matrices represented as 2D arrays. 

> ``np.eye(n, m)`` defines a 2D identity matrix. The elements where i=j are 1

Reviewer 2: I don't know if this is necessary, feel free to ignore.

```suggestion
``np.eye(n, m)`` defines a 2D identity matrix. The elements where i=j (row index and column index are equal) are 1
```

       [0, 2, 0],
       [0, 0, 3]])
 >>> np.diag([1, 2, 3], 1)
 array([[0, 1, 0, 0],
        [0, 0, 2, 0],
        [0, 0, 0, 3],
        [0, 0, 0, 0]])
 >>> a = np.array([[1, 2], [3, 4]])
 >>> np.diag(a)
 array([1, 4])

``vander(x, n)`` defines a Vandermonde matrix as a 2D NumPy array. Each column
of the Vandermonde matrix is a decreasing power of the input 1D array or
list or tuple,
``x`` where the highest polynomial order is ``n-1``. This array creation
routine is helpful in generating linear least squares models, as such::
 
 >>> np.vander(np.linspace(0, 2, 5), 2)
 array([[0.  , 0.  , 1.  ],
        [0.25, 0.5 , 1.  ],
        [1.  , 1.  , 1.  ],
        [2.25, 1.5 , 1.  ],
        [4.  , 2.  , 1.  ]])
 >>> np.vander([1, 2, 3, 4], 2)
 array([[1, 1],
        [2, 1],
        [3, 1],
        [4, 1]])
 >>> np.vander((1, 2, 3, 4), 4)
 array([[ 1,  1,  1,  1],
        [ 8,  4,  2,  1],
        [27,  9,  3,  1],
        [64, 16,  4,  1]])
 
3 - general ndarray creation functions
-----------------------------

The ndarray creation functions e.g. :func:`numpy.ones`,
:func:`numpy.zeros`, and `default_rng().random
<random.Generator.random>` define arrays based upon the desired shape.

> The  ndarray creation functions can create arrays with any dimension by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ndarray creation functions can create arrays with any dimension by
```

specifying how many dimensions and length along that dimension in a
tuple or list. 

:func:`numpy.zeros` will create an array filled with 0 values with the specified
shape. The default dtype is ``float64``::

 >>> np.zeros((2, 3))
 array([[0., 0., 0.], 
        [0., 0., 0.]])
 >>> np.zeros((2, 3, 2))
 array([[[0., 0.],
         [0., 0.],
         [0., 0.]],

        [[0., 0.],
         [0., 0.],
         [0., 0.]]])

:func:`numpy.ones` will create an array filled with 1 values. It is identical to
``zeros`` in all other respects as such::

 >>> np.ones((2, 3))
 array([[ 1., 1., 1.], 
        [ 1., 1., 1.]])
 >>> np.ones((2, 3, 2))
 array([[[1., 1.],
         [1., 1.],
         [1., 1.]],

        [[1., 1.],
         [1., 1.],
         [1., 1.]]])

> :func:`default_rng.random` will create an array filled with random

Reviewer: I think this will need to be something like:
```suggestion
The :meth:`~numpy.random.Generator.random` method of the result of :func:`default_rng` will create an array filled with random
```
for the link to work

values between 0 and 1. It is included with the :func:`numpy.random`
library. Below, two arrays are created with shapes (2,3) and (2,3,2),
respectively. The seed is set to 42 so you can reproduce these
pseudorandom numbers::

 >>> import numpy.random.default_rng
 >>> default_rng(42).random((2,3))
 array([[0.77395605, 0.43887844, 0.85859792],
        [0.69736803, 0.09417735, 0.97562235]])
 >>> default_rng(42).random((2,3,2))
 array([[[0.77395605, 0.43887844],
		 [0.85859792, 0.69736803],
		 [0.09417735, 0.97562235]],

		 [[0.7611397 , 0.78606431],
		 [0.12811363, 0.45038594],

> 		 [0.37079802, 0.92676499]]])

Reviewer: Indents are screwy here

Author: in vim, they looked fine. I updated to get them aligned again.

thanks!

Reviewer: You've mixed tabs and spaces - there should be no tabs in this file.

 >>> np.arange(2, 3, 0.1)
 array([ 2. , 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9])

Note: there are some subtleties regarding ``dtype``. In the second
example, the ``dtype`` is defined. In the third example, the array is
``dtype=float`` to accomodate the step size of ``0.1``. 

:func:`numpy.linspace` will create arrays with a specified number of elements, and
spaced equally between the specified beginning and end values. For
example: ::

 >>> np.linspace(1., 4., 6)
 array([ 1. ,  1.6,  2.2,  2.8,  3.4,  4. ])

The advantage of this creation object is that you guarantee the
number of elements and the starting and end point. The previous
``arange(start, stop, step)`` will not include the value ``stop``.

> 2 - 2D array creation objects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2 - 2D array creation functions
```

-----------------------------

> The 2D array creation objects e.g. :func:`numpy.eye`, :func:`numpy.diag`, and :func:`numpy.vander`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The 2D array creation functions e.g. :func:`numpy.eye`, :func:`numpy.diag`, and :func:`numpy.vander`
```

the diagonal _or_ if given a 2D array returns a 1D array that is
only the diagonal elements. The two array creation functions can be helpful while
doing linear algebra, as such::
 
 >>> np.diag([1, 2, 3])
 array([[1, 0, 0],
       [0, 2, 0],
       [0, 0, 3]])
 >>> np.diag([1, 2, 3], 1)
 array([[0, 1, 0, 0],
        [0, 0, 2, 0],
        [0, 0, 0, 3],
        [0, 0, 0, 0]])
 >>> a = np.array([[1, 2], [3, 4]])
 >>> np.diag(a)
 array([1, 4])

``vander(x, n)`` defines a Vandermonde matrix as a 2D NumPy array. Each column
of the Vandermonde matrix is a decreasing power of the input 1D array or
list or tuple,
``x`` where the highest polynomial order is ``n-1``. This array creation
routine is helpful in generating linear least squares models, as such::
 
 >>> np.vander(np.linspace(0, 2, 5), 2)
 array([[0.  , 0.  , 1.  ],
        [0.25, 0.5 , 1.  ],
        [1.  , 1.  , 1.  ],
        [2.25, 1.5 , 1.  ],
        [4.  , 2.  , 1.  ]])
 >>> np.vander([1, 2, 3, 4], 2)
 array([[1, 1],
        [2, 1],
        [3, 1],
        [4, 1]])
 >>> np.vander((1, 2, 3, 4), 4)
 array([[ 1,  1,  1,  1],
        [ 8,  4,  2,  1],
        [27,  9,  3,  1],
        [64, 16,  4,  1]])
 

> 3 - ndarray creation objects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3 - general ndarray creation functions
```

-----------------------------

> The ndarray creation objects e.g. :func:`numpy.ones`, :func:`numpy.zeros`, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ndarray creation functions e.g. :func:`numpy.ones`, :func:`numpy.zeros`, and
```

> :func:`default_rng.random` define arrays based upon the desired

Reviewer 3: Link does not work as written. Maybe this?
```suggestion
`default_rng().random <random.Generator.random>` define arrays based upon the desired
```

shape. The  
ndarray creation objects can create arrays with any dimension by
specifying how many dimensions and length along that dimension in a
tuple or list. 

:func:`numpy.zeros` will create an array filled with 0 values with the specified

> shape. The default dtype is ``float64``. ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shape. The default dtype is ``float64``::
```

Else this displays as "`float64`. :"

 >>> np.zeros((2, 3))

>  array([[ 0., 0., 0.], 
>         [ 0., 0., 0.]])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 array([[0., 0., 0.], 
        [0., 0., 0.]])
```

 >>> np.zeros((2, 3, 2))
 array([[[0., 0.],
         [0., 0.],
         [0., 0.]],

        [[0., 0.],
         [0., 0.],
         [0., 0.]]])

:func:`numpy.ones` will create an array filled with 1 values. It is identical to

> ``zeros`` in all other respects as such, ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``zeros`` in all other respects as such::
```

 >>> np.ones((2, 3))
 array([[ 1., 1., 1.], 
        [ 1., 1., 1.]])
 >>> np.ones((2, 3, 2))
 array([[[1., 1.],
         [1., 1.],
         [1., 1.]],

        [[1., 1.],
         [1., 1.],
         [1., 1.]]])

:func:`numpy.indices` will create a set of arrays (stacked as a one-higher
dimensioned array), one per dimension with each representing variation in that

> dimension.  An example illustrates much better than a verbal description: ::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
dimension: ::
```

 >>> np.indices((3,3))
 array([[[0, 0, 0], [1, 1, 1], [2, 2, 2]], [[0, 1, 2], [0, 1, 2], [0, 1, 2]]])

This is particularly useful for evaluating functions of multiple dimensions on

> a regular grid.

Reviewer 3: What about an example of `default_rng().random` ?

Author: adding one now. Thanks for catching :+1:

3) Replicating, joining, or mutating existing arrays
====================================================

Once you have created arrays, you can replicate, join, or mutate those
existing arrays to create new arrays. When you assign an array or its
elements to a new variable, you have to explicitly :func:`numpy.copy` the array,
otherwise the variable is a view into the original array. Consider the

> following example, ::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
following example::
```

would get the same result by adding 1 to ``a[:2]``. If you want to create a
_new_ array, use the :func:`numpy.copy` array creation routine as such, ::

 >>> a = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4])
 >>> b = a[:2].copy()
 >>> b += 1
 >>> print('a = ', a, 'b = ', b)
 a =  [1 2 3 4 5 6] b =  [2 3]

There are a number of routines to join existing arrays e.g. :func:`numpy.vstack`,
:func:`numpy.hstack`, and :func:`numpy.block`. Here is an example of joining four 2-by-2
arrays into a 4-by-4 array using ``block`` ::

 >>> A = np.ones((2, 2))
 >>> B = np.eye((2, 2))
 >>> C = np.zeros((2, 2))
 >>> D = np.diag((-3, -4))
 >>> np.block([[A, B], 
               [C, D]])
 array([[ 1.,  1.,  1.,  0. ],
        [ 1.,  1.,  0.,  1. ],
        [ 0.,  0., -3.,  0. ],
        [ 0.,  0.,  0., -4. ]])

Other routines use similar syntax to join ndarrays. Check the
routine's documentation for further examples and syntax. 

4) Reading arrays from disk, either from standard or custom formats
===================================================================

This is the most common case of large array creation. The details depend
greatly on the format of data on disk. This section gives

> general pointers on how to handle various formats.

Reviewer 3: Maybe a links to the IO howto somewhere in here?

Author: got it, thanks!

dimension: ::

 >>> np.indices((3,3))
 array([[[0, 0, 0], [1, 1, 1], [2, 2, 2]], [[0, 1, 2], [0, 1, 2], [0, 1, 2]]])

This is particularly useful for evaluating functions of multiple dimensions on
a regular grid.

3) Replicating, joining, or mutating existing arrays
====================================================

Once you have created arrays, you can replicate, join, or mutate those
existing arrays to create new arrays. When you assign an array or its
elements to a new variable, you have to explicitly :func:`numpy.copy` the array,
otherwise the variable is a view into the original array. Consider the
following example::

 >>> a = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6])
 >>> b = a[:2]
 >>> b += 1
 >>> print('a = ', a, 'b = ', b)
 a =  [2 3 3 4 5 6] b =  [2 3]

In this example, you did not create a new array. You created a variable,
``b`` that viewed the first 2 elements of ``a``. When you added 1 to ``b`` you
would get the same result by adding 1 to ``a[:2]``. If you want to create a
_new_ array, use the :func:`numpy.copy` array creation routine as such::

 >>> a = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4])
 >>> b = a[:2].copy()
 >>> b += 1
 >>> print('a = ', a, 'b = ', b)
 a =  [1 2 3 4 5 6] b =  [2 3]

> For more information and examples ook at :ref:`Copies and Views
> <quickstart.copies-and-views>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information and examples look at :ref:`Copies and Views
<quickstart.copies-and-views>`.
```

 >>> default_rng(42).random((2,3,2))
 array([[[0.77395605, 0.43887844],
         [0.85859792, 0.69736803],
         [0.09417735, 0.97562235]],
        [[0.7611397 , 0.78606431],
         [0.12811363, 0.45038594],
         [0.37079802, 0.92676499]]])

:func:`numpy.indices` will create a set of arrays (stacked as a one-higher
dimensioned array), one per dimension with each representing variation in that
dimension: ::

 >>> np.indices((3,3))
 array([[[0, 0, 0], 
         [1, 1, 1], 
         [2, 2, 2]], 
        [[0, 1, 2], 
         [0, 1, 2], 
         [0, 1, 2]]])

This is particularly useful for evaluating functions of multiple dimensions on
a regular grid.

3) Replicating, joining, or mutating existing arrays
====================================================

Once you have created arrays, you can replicate, join, or mutate those
existing arrays to create new arrays. When you assign an array or its
elements to a new variable, you have to explicitly :func:`numpy.copy` the array,
otherwise the variable is a view into the original array. Consider the
following example::

 >>> a = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6])
 >>> b = a[:2]
 >>> b += 1

>  >>> print('a = ', a, 'b = ', b)
>  a =  [2 3 3 4 5 6] b =  [2 3]

Reviewer: May as well make this look tidy:
```suggestion
 >>> print('a =', a, '; b =', b)
 a = [2 3 3 4 5 6]; b = [2 3]
```
although perhaps easiest to read as
```suggestion
 >>> a
 array([2, 3, 3, 4, 5, 6])
 >>> b
 array([2, 3])
```

In this example, you did not create a new array. You created a variable,
``b`` that viewed the first 2 elements of ``a``. When you added 1 to ``b`` you
would get the same result by adding 1 to ``a[:2]``. If you want to create a
*new* array, use the :func:`numpy.copy` array creation routine as such::

 >>> a = np.array([1, 2, 3, 4])
 >>> b = a[:2].copy()
 >>> b += 1
 >>> print('a = ', a, 'b = ', b)
 a =  [1 2 3 4 5 6] b =  [2 3]

For more information and examples look at :ref:`Copies and Views
<quickstart.copies-and-views>`.

There are a number of routines to join existing arrays e.g. :func:`numpy.vstack`,
:func:`numpy.hstack`, and :func:`numpy.block`. Here is an example of joining four 2-by-2

> arrays into a 4-by-4 array using ``block`` ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
arrays into a 4-by-4 array using ``block``::
```

 $ cat simple.csv
 x, y
 0, 0
 1, 1
 2, 4
 3, 9

Importing ``simple.csv`` is accomplished using :func:`loadtxt`::

 >>> loadtxt('simple.csv', delimiter = ',', skiprows = 1) # doctest: +SKIP
 array([[0., 0.],
        [1., 1.],
        [2., 4.],
        [3., 9.]])

More generic ASCII files can be read using `scipy.io` and `Pandas
<https://pandas.pydata.org/>`_.

5) Creating arrays from raw bytes through the use of strings or buffers
=======================================================================

There are a variety of approaches one can use. If the file has a relatively
simple format then one can write a simple I/O library and use the NumPy
`fromfile()` function and `.tofile()` method to read and write NumPy arrays
directly (mind your byteorder though!) If a good C or C++ library exists that
read the data, one can wrap that library with a variety of techniques though
that certainly is much more work and requires significantly more advanced
knowledge to interface with C or C++.

6) Use of special library functions (e.g., SciPy, Pandas, and OpenCV)
=====================================================================

> NumPy is a fundamental library in the Python Scientific Computing stack. 
> Many Python libraries, including SciPy, Pandas, and OpenCV, can create,
> operate on, and work with NumPy arrays. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NumPy is the fundamental library for array containers in the Python Scientific Computing
stack. Many Python libraries, including SciPy, Pandas, and OpenCV, use NumPy ndarrays
as the common format for data exchange, These libraries can create,
operate on, and work with NumPy arrays. 
```

write many image formats such as jpg, png, etc).

Common ASCII Formats
--------------------

Delimited files such as comma separated value (csv) and tab separated
value (tsv) files are used for programs like Excel and LabView. Python
functions can read and parse these files line-by-line. NumPy has two
standard routines for importing a file with delimited data :func:`numpy.loadtxt`
and :func:`numpy.genfromtxt`. These functions have more involved use cases in
:doc:`how-to-io`. A simple example given a ``simple.csv``::

 $ cat simple.csv
 x, y
 0, 0
 1, 1
 2, 4
 3, 9

Importing ``simple.csv`` is accomplished using :func:`loadtxt`::

 >>> np.loadtxt('simple.csv', delimiter = ',', skiprows = 1) # doctest: +SKIP
 array([[0., 0.],
        [1., 1.],
        [2., 4.],
        [3., 9.]])

More generic ASCII files can be read using `scipy.io` and `Pandas
<https://pandas.pydata.org/>`_.

5) Creating arrays from raw bytes through the use of strings or buffers
=======================================================================

There are a variety of approaches one can use. If the file has a relatively
simple format then one can write a simple I/O library and use the NumPy

> `fromfile()` function and `.tofile()` method to read and write NumPy arrays

Reviewer: I don't think these will link properly as is. Either try to fix the links, or change to double backticks.

Author: changed to ``

thanks

write many image formats such as jpg, png, etc).

Common ASCII Formats
--------------------

Delimited files such as comma separated value (csv) and tab separated
value (tsv) files are used for programs like Excel and LabView. Python
functions can read and parse these files line-by-line. NumPy has two
standard routines for importing a file with delimited data :func:`numpy.loadtxt`
and :func:`numpy.genfromtxt`. These functions have more involved use cases in

> :doc:`how-to-io`. A simple example given a ``simple.csv``::
> 
>  $ cat simple.csv

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:doc:`how-to-io`. A simple example given a ``simple.csv``:

.. code-block:: bash

 $ cat simple.csv
```
else this will be treated as python
